---
title: "Towards understanding the conversation surrounding sexual assault"
---

## Towards understanding the conversation surrounding sexual assault

 *This was my final paper for 9.46 (Neuroscience of Morality). It's an attempt to apply findings about morality from cognitive science and neuroscience to try to understand why people's discourse around rape is the way it is (aka, awful). I'm not entirely satisfied with my arguments here, but I think it's a direction that could use exploring. For one, in this paper, I make a lot of assumptions and tenuous connections because there wasn't research directly on people's reactions and moral judgments about sexual assault. I wish there were.*

<center>
<p>"He's a nice boy. Are you sure you want to report this?" <sup><a href="https://mic.com/articles/104442/9-times-college-officials-said-the-worst-things-about-sexual-assault">source</a></sup></p>
<p>"...it didn't turn out the way they wanted it to turn out, guess what they did? They then went to Public Safety and said 'He raped me.' " <sup><a href="https://mic.com/articles/104442/9-times-college-officials-said-the-worst-things-about-sexual-assault">source</a></sup></p>
<p>"We also need to start talking about the power that women have to control the situation" <sup><a href="https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2017/11/10/these-awful-comments-rape-and-sexual-assault-were-actually-said-out-loud">source</a></sup></p>
<p>"She's 16, why was she that drunk where she doesn't remember. It could have been much worse. She's lucky." <sup><a href="https://www.buzzfeed.com/tasneemnashrulla/22-comments-about-rape-that-will-make-you-really-angry">source</a></sup></p>
<p>"She wasn't the victim she claimed to be." <sup><a href="https://www.bustle.com/p/9-infuriating-things-judges-have-said-when-ruling-on-sexual-assault-cases-54674">source</a></sup></p>
<p>"Why couldn't you just keep your knees together?" <sup><a href="https://www.bustle.com/p/9-infuriating-things-judges-have-said-when-ruling-on-sexual-assault-cases-54674">source</a></sup></p>
</center>

The public dialogue around sexual assault is disjointed: sexual assault is a serious crime, and yet some people treat it as something victims bring upon themselves and then dare to complain about. The sympathy and leniency shown to perpetrators, coupled with the doubt and blame cast on victims makes the victim seem like the transgressor and the prepetrator the transgressed. We see this in statements like those above. Why do people say (and think) these things? 

Moral foundations theory hypothesizes a small set of universal morally relevant dimensions, each with different considerations. Two are relevant to people's moral assessments of sexual assault: the dimensions of care/harm and purity/impurity (Graham et al., 2009). When people assess an act through the lens of harm, they consider the perpetrator's intent, belief, and desires; the victim's social and moral status; and the method used to bring about the harm. The relevance of all these issues matches conversations about the perpetrator's prior good deeds and their state of knowledge, the victim's prior behavior, and the details of what happened. In addition to the obvious harm dimension, people's responses to sexual assault are consistent with there being another moral factor at play: a violation of the principle of purity. By being sexually violated, the victim participated in a degrading act, and when people consider an event through the lens of impurity, outcome is all that matters, with no room for intent. This is consistent with the shaming and ostracization that victims face. To compound the problem of two moral frameworks considering very different sets of questions morally relevant; individuals also vary in how they weigh these frameworks. 

Sexual assault is a form of harm, so we can learn about some of the morally relevant factors by seeing how people assess harmful acts more generally. How bad harmful acts are depends in part on the mental state and goals of the perpetrator, that is, their intent. Intent is a complicated feature; as Cushman (2015) explains, intentions depend on beliefs about the world and desires for what might happen and are modulated by the level of control over their actions and the outcomes of these actions. Harms are worse if they are controllable, if the perpetrator knew they would (likely) happen, and if the perpetrator desired to cause harm. Harms are mitigated if the perpetrator was trying to realize a different (morally good) goal via the harmful action. When people talk about sexual assault, they assess these factors, and sometimes use them to reduce perpetrator responsibility but arguing deficits of control, knowledge, and desire for harm. 

Perpetrators are considered worse when they commit unprovoked, controllable, and motivated harms, compared to when they act in self-defense, by accident, or to their own detriment. As part of anthropological research, Barrett et al. (2016) asked members of eight small scale societies and two industrialized societies about the badness of different harmful acts given different levels of intent or mitigating circumstances. Participants from all societies thought that hitting someone in self-defense (when they just hit you) was much less bad than hitting someone intentionally without provocation (Barrett et al., 2016). In addition, participants thought that hitting someone was worse if was described as a controllable action ('suddenly [Agent] turned and struck [Victim] in the face with his hand') compared to an uncontrollable accident ('suddenly [Agent] tripped and fell forward and his hand accidentally struck [Victim] in the face') (Barrett et al., 2016). Another relevant factor was whether the agent hated the victim (motivation for hitting) or wanted to make a good impression on the victim (motivation for not hitting). Participants tended to judge the motivated scenario similarly to the intentional scenario and the anti-motivated scenario similarly to the accidental scenario, for acts of both hitting and killing (Barrett et al., 2016). Thus the assessor's perspective on whether the perpetrator stood to gain or lose by the act is seen as equivalent moral information to whether the act was intentional. In the case of sexual assault, the threat of negative consequences to the perpetrator (standing to lose) could lead the act to be treated as more accidental than it actually was. This framework could explain the perceived relevance of issues such as the perpetrator's sex drive (lack of control argument) and the victim and perpetrator's prior history (a positive relationship could make harm seem unmotivated). 

In addition, the perpetrator's belief state and desired outcome also matter; doing something reasonably expected to harm a person is worse that doing something reasonably expected to be harmless, regardless of actual outcome. In a different study, participants recruited from the online platform Amazon Turk were asked to rate how morally wrong different scenarios were (Young and Saxe, 2011). Participants thought that poisoning someone intentionally (by putting a powder labeled poison into their drink) was slightly worse than attempting to poison them (the powder labeled poison turned out to be sugar) and both were much worse than poisoning someone accidentally (by putting a powder labelled sugar into their drink) (Young and Saxe, 2011). In this case, the perpetrator's belief state (whether they thought adding the powder would kill the person) mattered more than whether the person was actually poisoned (Young and Saxe, 2011). In the case of harmful acts, intent and belief take precendence over outcome when weighing moral wrongness. This works to explain why people focus on the perpetrator's belief state and why statements such as "It was an innocent mistake." are relevant. 

These behavioral patterns of caring about intent have a neural correlate. One region of the brain, the right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ), located towards the back of the brain where the temporal and parietal lobes meet, is associated with understanding the thoughts and knowledge states of others. The rTPJ shows different patterns of activity when someone thinks about intentional harms versus unintentional harms. This lends weight to the idea that the distinction between accidental and intentional action is fundamental and raises the possibility that differences in individual judgments may be the result of different connection strengths within their rTPJs. 

In one study looking at the rTPJ, participants read stories about harmful acts while their brains were imaged with fMRI (Chakroff et al., 2016). fMRI, or functional magnetic resonance imaging, is a technique that measures blood flow as a proxy for neural activity. In the stories, the protagonist either had reason to believe that their actions would probably cause harm or that their actions would be unlikely to cause harm. Participants rated the probably harms to be much worse than the unlikely harms. The fMRI results showed that there was activity in the rTPJ during all the harm scenarios, but that there were different patterns of activity within the rTPJ depending on whether the harm was probably or unlikely Chakroff et al. (2016). There are some clusters of neurons within the rTPJ that responded much more strongly to reading about unlikely harms than probable harms, and other clusters that showed the opposite pattern. This suggests that at least along the dimension of "should have known better" patterns of activity in the rTPJ correlate with judgments of moral badness. 

Furthermore, the rTPJ doesn't just show patterns of activity which correlate with moral judgments; the rTPJ is a key region in the pathway of evaluating the moral badness of an event. Young et al. (2010) used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to disrupt some of the brain activity in the rTPJ of some participants. During or after the stimulation, participants (including control participants who did not receive stimulation) provided judgments on the badness of events that varied in the outcome (did harm actually occur?) and the intent (did someone try to cause harm?). Participants who received TMS, and thus had reduced rTPJ activity, gave judgments based more on outcome and less on intent than participants who did not receive TMS. This was particularly evident for the attempted (but failed) harm condition, which control participants judged as nearly as bad at intentional (successful) harm, but TMS participants judged as not that bad. The strongly suggests that the intent information that plays a role in people's decisions about the moral badness of an act is processed in the rTPJ. 

A fuller understanding of this pathway comes from Treadway et al. (2014), who looked at the effect of graphic language on people's assessments of harm. When participants made punishment judgments about harm scenarios described in graphic detail, they showed increased activity in the amygdala and gave greater punishments, but only when the harm was controllable (Treadway et al., 2014). When presented with scenarios with uncontrollable harms, there was increased activity in the rTPJ and medial prefrontal cortex which suppressed amygdalar activity and resulted in no effect of graphic language (Treadway et al., 2014). Taken together, these studies demonstrate a clear role for the rTPJ in determining how intentional an act was; this assessment is then combined with other streams of information to determine how bad an act was overall. Given the other roles of the rTPJ, it seems plausible that the rTPJ is taking in information about the perpetrator and the harmful event and synthesizing this into a model of the perpetrator's state of mind. 

The rTPJ is far from the only brain region involved in understanding a harmful act; other regions associated with theory of mind are involved in processing desires and 'greater good' motivations. In a studyby Yamada et al. (2012), participants read about a murder case that either included a mitigating motivation or did not. The mitigating motivations were preventing suffering (mercy killing a sick relative) and self-preservation (killing an abuser); these are both cases where there is a specific (acceptable) desire and the (plausible) belief that killing would achieve the desire. When reading about the mitigating scenarios, participants showed greater activation in three brain regions associated with theory of mind, the precuneus, left temporoparietal junction (lTPJ), and dorsal medial pre-frontal cortex (DMPFC) (Yamada et al., 2012). When participants chose prison sentences for hypothetical murderers, activity in the precuneus, DMPFC, and anterior cingulate cortex correlated with participants choosing reduced sentenced for murderers with mitigating motivations Yamada et al. (2012). In addition, activity in the right-mid insula correlated with participant-level differences in much these motivations affected prison sentence length. This points to insula activity as modulating how sympathy for a perpetrator turns into reduced punishments. This suggests that even when someone intentionally perpetrates a serious crime, sympathetic or understandable motives can be somewhat exculpatory, and people vary in how much they find motivations to be exculpatory. 

When assessing harmful acts, intent matters, as does negligence. Harms are worse if they are controllable, probable, or advantageous to the perpetrator, and less bad if committed in the pursuit of a (morally acceptable) goal, rather than intending harm. Can these factors explain any of the conversation around sexual assault? A central issue is the goal of the perpetrator; it is unclear (or perhaps unlikely) that harm is their goal; instead they may be motivated by morally neutral goals such as power, social status, or sexual satisfaction; hence questions about perpetrator's intent. However, lack of intent does not generally clear people of wrongdoing; people are often held accountable for the predictable side effects of their actions, and negligence is often considered criminal and amoral. This brings us to the issue of probable harm, where questions are raised about the perpetrator's state of knowledge ("did he know what he was doing was rape?", "did she say no aggressively enough?"). While it would seem that issues of control and advantage would be fairly clear cut, people make claims that undermine these aspects. For instance, speculation about (male) sex drives, treating sexual assault as 'inevitable', and inquiring about levels of alcohol consumption all fall into this category. The fact that various dimensions of intent matter for harm explains some of what people say. 

When assessing the badness of a harm, people also consider the victim's social status, threateningness, and prior guilt. When presented with a moral dilemma of whether or not to kill one person to save five, participants found it increasingly acceptable to kill people the less they were perceived as warm and competent (Cikara et al., 2010). It's also more acceptable to engage in violence and sabotage against someone who is seen as competing with or threatening your in-group, for instance professional women (Cikara, 2015). Lastly, it's more acceptable to harm someone if they are guilty or have done something bad. In the study by Yamada et al. (2012), some of the mitigating factors involved victims who were guilty of crimes, and these scenarios led to lighter punishments, indicating that the guilt of the victim made their murder more acceptable. More generally, violence is sometimes perceived as moral, when it is done to people who are perceived as deserving it (Rai et al., 2017). The fact that victim identity matters when assessing harms helps to explain why people want to know about the details of sexual assault victims' lives to determine how acceptable the violence against them was. 

Another component to this puzzle is action aversion, the feeling that some ways of achieving a harm are viscerally worse than others. Compared with other harms, some sexual assaults may be less likely to induce action aversion because the methods of harm are less prototypical. As an example of action aversion, consider the trolley problem where a participant has to decide whether they would kill one person to stop a runaway train from killing five others. In one version of the problem, they would have to push someone off a bridge onto the tracks so the train hits them and stops, and in another version, they would have to push a button, rerouting the train so that it hits the one person instead of the five. Despite equivalent outcomes and levels of intent, people report that they are much more willing to push the button than to push the person (Shenhav and Greene, 2014). Not only does this aversion create distinctions between different ways of killing someone, it also makes people uncomfortable acting-out things such as smashing someone's fingers, shooting a gun at someone, or even watching someone else do the same (even when assured that no harm will result) (Cushman et al., 2012). Cushman et al. (2012) further argues that when we hear about a harmful act, we think about doing it from the perpetrator's perspective, and one factor in the badness of an act is how aversive it feels to mentally simulate doing it. While the origins of this aversion to harm-associated actions are not well understood, it is clear that some qualities of harmful actions such as using weapons or physical force make them worse than the same outcome done with the same intention by issuing a command or pulling a lever. While some sexual assaults are committed using methods such as threats of violence and weapons which elicit action aversion, many sexual assaults are enacted via forms of coercion and force that do not elicit action aversion, and as such these sexual assaults may be perceived to be less bad than other harms that cause similar degrees of suffering. 

When we think about harmful acts, we heavily weight intent factors and also consider victim identity and methodology. Using this framework helps us understand why people say some of the things they do about sexual assault; they are questioning and commenting on morally relevant aspects of a harmful act. However, in many cases, sexual assaults do not have the characteristics in terms of intent, victim identity, and method that go with maximal culpability and badness. This creates just enough wiggle room for some people to weave stories excusing sexual assault, and for others to have niggling doubts in their minds. 

In considering acts of sexual assault, harm is not the only morally relevant dimension; purity is also a morally relevant dimension. People see victims of sexual assault as having participated in a impure, degrading act, which is a violation of the moral principle of purity. In sharp contrast to the huge list of factors relevant to assessing the badness of a harm violation, the only factor that seems to matter when assessing the badness of a purity violation is whether a violation occurred. 

Bodily purity and sanctity is a separate value from not doing harm, but it is still a moral one. The value of purity is part of the moral teaching in a number of cultures, and it functions as a moral foundation, holding a society together by decreasing selfishness and marking cultural boundaries Graham et al. (2009). Additionally, some people display unwillingness to violate the principle of purity for any amount of money (Graham et al., 2009). This unwillingness is also displayed with regard to other morals and is held by some to identify moral values Graham et al. (2009). These factors seem to provide adequate evidence for treating purity as a moral value, and seeing what the lens of purity violation can tell us about perceptions of sexual assault. 

When someone participates in an impure event, people see it as equally bad regardless of whether it was intentional. In their study of eight small scale societies and two industrial ones, Barrett et al. (2016) asked participants how bad food taboo violations were if the person knew what they were eating or if they didn't. Across societies, participants generally considered both food taboo violations equally bad; that is, belief state (a necessary component of intent) didn't affect the judgments (Barrett et al., 2016). In a study by Young and Saxe (2011), Amazon Turk participants rated how bad accidental and intentional harms, incest, and food taboo violations were. The intentional versions of the three scenarios were rated as equally bad; in contrast, the accidental incest and food taboo scenarios were rated as much worse than the accidental harms (Young and Saxe, 2011). These studies strongly suggest that when it comes to the morality of bodily degradation or impurity, intent doesn't matter at all. 

This difference in the role of intent is reflected in qualitative and quantitative differences in brain activity. In Chakroff et al. (2016), participants read stories about intentional and accidental incest and violations of food taboos while being imaged (in addition to stories about harm mentioned previously). The incest and food taboo violations elicited low levels of activity in the rTPJ; and the patterns of activity did not discriminate between intentional and accidental scenarios. This contrasts with the harm results, which elicited high levels of rTPJ activity in differential patterns depending on presence of intent. These differences provide clear evidence that harm violations and purity violations are assessed differently, and that the intent processing critical to harm assessment is absent from assessing impurity. This contrast helps to explain the paradoxical behavior of excusing the perpetrator and blaming the victim: the perpetrator has committed a harmful act, where mitigation is possible, but the victim has participated in a purity violation where no excuse or explanation makes a difference. 

Thinking of sexual assault as a dyad of harm and purity violations can provide insight into the discourse around sexual assault. This framework also explains some sources of individual difference in how people talk about sexual assault. 

People differ in how much moral weight they put on different moral principles as demonstrated by both laboratory experiments and real world observational studies. Laboratory participants in Graham et al. (2009)'s experiments were asked to evaluate the importance of abstract values, such as harm and purity, and to answer questions about concrete scenarios involving these moral considerations. Graham et al. (2009) found that people varied in how much moral importance was placed on values such as harm and purity. As a complement to this experimental work, an observational study by Hofmann et al. (2014) had American and Canadian adults report moral and immoral events they had recently participated in. They found that participants varied in how frequently they reported events involving harm or impurity Hofmann et al. (2014). These individual differences begin to account for how two people can see the same event differently, depending on how they value moral principles. We expect that people who value purity more would focus more on the impurity of a victim of sexual assault (and thus perhaps view them as more culpable and less redeemable) than people who value purity.

Another factor that could affect people's perceptions is how much empathy they feel for the perpetrator and the victim. People vary in how widely they extent empathy to others, with some people reserving empathy for their nearest and dearest, and others extending empathy to a larger group. In laboratory studies, Waytz et al. (2016) asked participants to distribute moral value to a set of different groups (family, close friends, humanity at large, animals, etc.). Some people placed more moral weight on the smaller, nearer circles of individuals, while other participants tended to be more expansive in their assignments of moral value. These individual differences will interact with the relationships between the moral observer and the perpetrator and the victim. In the case of direct relationships, someone with a smaller empathy circle may be more empathic to whoever they know better; in other cases, observers may be more empathetic to someone they perceive as closer because of a shared identity. 

Who are these different sets of people with different moral weights and different size empathy circles? Each of these studies was looking at potential differences between conservatives and liberals. Political conservatism (as self-reported or measured on an implicit association test) correlates with putting equal moral weight on harm and purity; liberals put considerably more moral weight on harm than purity (Graham et al., 2009). 

This is confirmed by Hofmann et al. (2014) who found that conservatives were more likely than liberals to report moral events with a purity component. As for empathy, conservatives extend empathy less widely than liberals do (Waytz et al., 2016). These tendencies of liberals and conservatives are intriguing given partisan differences in views of sexual assault. 

Other aspects of assessing moral violations also vary individual to individual. For the most part, the sources, correlations, and impacts of these differences are unknown; but we do know some about society-level variations in whether a lack of intent mitigates responsibility for a harm. In their cross-cultural study on the badness of harmful acts, Barrett et al. (2016) observed that participants from Yasawa (a small-scale society) paid little account to intent, while US participants made widely different judgments depending on the presence of intent. Societies also differed in whether necessity, insanity, or mistaken facts mitigated responsibility for harms. The two industrialized samples (from the Ukraine and the US) were the most generous in treating conditions as mitigating (Barrett et al., 2016). These cross-cultural differences suggest that the factors involved in harm assessment are at least partially learned, which raises the possibility that individual differences could derive from differential formative environments. All the other factors discussed is this paper, from behavioral judgments of badness to the effects of TMS, also have individual level variation, the causes and impact of which could be illuminating. 

Sexual assault is a pressing issue in the United States today, and one approach to addressing it is changing how people think and talk about sexual violence. However, when even reasonable people feel doubt, cast blame, and make excuses; how can we engage productively? A first step is to understand what might be behind the speech, behind the thoughts. To do this, we need to look not only outwards at our culture, but also inwards at how our human minds and brains do morality. Only by understanding what drives our thoughts and reactions and those of others will we be able to gain clarity on our behavior and work more effectively towards changing it. 

### References 

Barrett, H., Bolyanatz, A., Crittenden, A., Fessler, D., Fitzpatrick, S., Gurven, M., Henrich, J., Kanovsky, M., Kushnick, G., Pisor, A., Scelza, B., Stich, S., von Ruenden, C., Zhao, W., and Laurance, S. (2016). Small-scale societies exhibit fundamental variation in the role of intentions in moral judgement. PNAS, 113(17). 

Chakroff, A., Dungan, J., Koster-Hale, J., Brown, A., Saxe, R., and Young, L. (2016). When minds matter for moral judgment: intent information is neurally encoded for harmful but not impure acts. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience. 

Cikara, M. (2015). Intergroup Schadenfreude: motivating participation in collective violence. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 3. 

Cikara, M., Farnsworth, R., Harris, L., and Fiske, S. (2010). On the wrong side of the trolley track: neural correlates of relative social valuation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 5(5). 

Cushman, F. (2015). Deconstructing Intent to reconstruct morality. Current Opinion in Psychology, 6. 

Cushman, F., Gray, K., Gaffey, A., and Mendes, W. (2012). Simulating Murder: The Aversion to Harmful Action. Emotion, 12(1). 

Graham, J., Haidt, J., and Nosek, B. (2009). Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5). 

Hofmann, W., Wisneski, D., Brandt, M., and Skitka, L. (2014). Morality in everyday life. Science, 345. 

Rai, T., Valdesolo, P., and Graham, J. (2017). Dehumanization increases instrumental violence, but not moral violence. PNAS, 114(32). 

Shenhav, A. and Greene, J. (2014). Integrative Moral Judgment: Dissociating the Roles of the Amygdala and Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex. Journal and Neuroscience, 34(13). 

Treadway, M., Buckholtz, J., Martin, J., Jan, K., Asplund, C., Ginther, M., Jones, O., and Marios, R. (2014). Corticolimbic gating of emotion-driven punishment. Nature Neuroscience, 17(9). 

Waytz, A., Iyer, R., Young, L., and Graham, J. (2016). Ideological Differences in the Expanse of Empathy. Social Psychology of Political Polarization. 

Yamada, M., Camerer, C., Fujie, S., Kata, M., Matsuda, T., Takano, H., Ito, H., Suhara, T., and Takahashi, H. (2012). Neural circuits in the brain that are activated when mitigating criminal sentences. Nature Communications, 3. 

Young, L., Camprodon, J., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., and Saxe, R. (2010). Disruption of the right temporoparietal junction with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of beliefs in moral judgments. PNAS, 107(15). 

Young, L. and Saxe, R. (2011). When ignorance is no excuse: Different roles for intent across moral domains. Cognition, 120. 7
